---
layout: post
title:  "Hosting an NFS server on FreeBSD Virtualbox machine"
description: Ever wamted to have files on one machine and the ability to edit them on another?
date:   2020-05-20 21:03:36 +0530
categories: NFS VirtualBox FreeBSD
---

**NFS (Network File System)** is a protocol allowing remote access to a filesystem through the network. For my paricular usecase, I wanted to have a shared FreeBSD directory so that I can easily edit it on my Linux machine(where I am comfortable) and see the changes be reflected on the FreeBSD VirtualBox Machine. This would help me have my comfortable development environement and also saves me from the hassle of setting up a development environment on the virtualbox machine.

**NOTE:** I used the Host-only adapter in the virtualboxi(vboxnet0) and the following IP addresses were assigned:
* Ubuntu Host's IP  - 192.168.56.1
* FreeBSD VM's IP - 192.168.56.105

## 1. Setting up the NFS server on the FreeBSD VM

First of all, lets start by adding the necessary configurations to the **/etc/rc.conf** by using sysrc as follows: 

```sh
$ sysrc nfs_server_enable="YES"
$ sysrc rpcbind_enable="YES"
$ sysrc mountd_enable="YES"

```
Now we need to specify the directory to be shared and the IP address of the clients to which it should be shared in the **/etc/exports** file. 

```sh
$ /usr/src -alldirs -maproot=root -network 192.168.56.1 -mask 255.255.255.0
```
To elaborate on to why these flags are used:
* **maproot** - The credential of the specified user is used	for remote access by root.  The	credential includes all	the groups to which the	user
     is	a member on the	local machine.  The	user may be specified
     by	name or	number.	 The user string may be	quoted,	or use backslash escaping.
* **alldirs** - allows the host(s) to mount at any point within the file system, including regular files if the -r option is
     used on mountd(8)

Now just run the following to start the NFS server with the specified mounts:

```sh
$ service nfsd start
$ service mountd reload      #To make the export changes take effect 
```
You can view the mountpoints with:
```sh
$ showmount -e
```
## 2. Setting up the NFS client on the Ubuntu Host

First of all install the required packages
```
$ sudo apt install nfsd-kernel-server
```
Ensure that the firewall is disabled(ufw or firewalld) or allows the NFS packets. Now mount the directory. In my case I will use **/nfs** as the directory to mount the shared directory on the Ubuntu NFS client. It is important to ensure that the same version of NFS is used on the client as on the server. In my case, the NFSv3 was used at the server side. It is good to specify the NFS version by using the **-o** flag. Specify the command in the following manner to mount the shared
directory.

```sh
$ sudo mount -o vers=3 192.168.56.105:/usr/src /nfs/freebsd
```
Finally, I am able to use the shared directory on my Ubuntu.

**Thanks! Happy coding :)**
